# BIOMD0000000375: Mears1997_CRAC_PancreaticBetaCells

## Installation

Download this repository, and install with distutils

`python setup.py install`

Or, install using pip

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/BIOMD0000000375.git`

To install a specific version (in this example, from the 2014-09-16 BioModels release)

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/BIOMD0000000375.git@20140916`


# Model Notes


This a model from the article:  
** Evidence that calcium release-activated current mediates the biphasic electrical activity of mouse pancreatic beta-cells. **   
Mears D, Sheppard NF Jr, Atwater I, Rojas E, Bertram R, Sherman A. _J Membr
Biol_1997 Jan 1;155(1):47-59
[9002424](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9002424),  
**Abstract:**   
The electrical response of pancreatic beta-cells to step increases in glucose
concentration is biphasic, consisting of a prolonged depolarization with
action potentials (Phase 1) followed by membrane potential oscillations known
as bursts. We have proposed that the Phase 1 response results from the
combined depolarizing influences of potassium channel closure and an inward,
nonselective cation current (ICRAN) that activates as intracellular calcium
stores empty during exposure to basal glucose (Bertram et al., 1995). The
stores refill during Phase 1, deactivating ICRAN and allowing steady-state
bursting to commence. We support this hypothesis with additional simulations
and experimental results indicating that Phase 1 duration is sensitive to the
filling state of intracellular calcium stores. First, the duration of the
Phase 1 transient increases with duration of prior exposure to basal (2.8 mM)
glucose, reflecting the increased time required to fill calcium stores that
have been emptying for longer periods. Second, Phase 1 duration is reduced
when islets are exposed to elevated K+ to refill calcium stores in the
presence of basal glucose. Third, when extracellular calcium is removed during
the basal glucose exposure to reduce calcium influx into the stores, Phase 1
duration increases. Finally, no Phase 1 is observed following
hyperpolarization of the beta-cell membrane with diazoxide in the continued
presence of 11 mm glucose, a condition in which intracellular calcium stores
remain full. Application of carbachol to empty calcium stores during basal
glucose exposure did not increase Phase 1 duration as the model predicts.
Despite this discrepancy, the good agreement between most of the experimental
results and the model predictions provides evidence that a calcium release-
activated current mediates the Phase 1 electrical response of the pancreatic
beta-cell.

This model was taken from the [CellML
repository](http://www.cellml.org/models) and automatically converted to SBML.  
The original model was: [ **Mears D, Sheppard NF Jr, Atwater I, Rojas E,
Bertram R, Sherman A. (1997) - version=1.0**
](http://models.cellml.org/exposure/5e0804f38832d0ecedf04f7403c565b5)  
The original CellML model was created by:  
**Tessa Paris**   
tpar054@aucklanduni.ac.uk  
The University of Auckland  

This model originates from BioModels Database: A Database of Annotated
Published Models (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/). It is copyright (c)
2005-2011 The BioModels.net Team.  
For more information see the [terms of
use](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/legal.html).  
To cite BioModels Database, please use: [Li C, Donizelli M, Rodriguez N,
Dharuri H, Endler L, Chelliah V, Li L, He E, Henry A, Stefan MI, Snoep JL,
Hucka M, Le Nov√®re N, Laibe C (2010) BioModels Database: An enhanced, curated
and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic models. BMC Syst
Biol., 4:92.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20587024)


